# Code for "Planning spatial networks with Monte Carlo tree search"

This is the code for the paper _Planning spatial networks with Monte Carlo tree search_ by [Victor-Alexandru Darvariu](https://victor.darvariu.me), [Stephen Hailes](http://www.cs.ucl.ac.uk/drupalpeople/S.Hailes.html) and [Mirco Musolesi](https://mircomusolesi.org), Proceedings of the Royal Society A, 479(2269):20220383, 2023. If you use this code, please consider citing:

```
@article{darvariu2023planning,
  author = {Darvariu, Victor-Alexandru and Hailes, Stephen and Musolesi, Mirco}, 
  title={Planning spatial networks with {Monte Carlo} tree search},
  journal = {Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences},
  year = {2023}, 
  publisher = {The Royal Society Publishing}, 
  volume = {479}, 
  number = {2269}, 
  pages={20220383},
}

```

## License
MIT.

## Prerequisites
**Please ensure that you clone this repository under the `relnet` root directory**, e.g. 
```
git clone git@github.com:VictorDarvariu/planning-spatial-networks-mcts.git relnet
````

Currently tested on Linux and MacOS (specifically, CentOS 7.4.1708 and Mac OS Big Sur 11.2.3), can also be adapted to Windows through [WSL](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/about).
Makes heavy use of Docker, see e.g. [here](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/centos/) for how to install on CentOS. Tested with Docker 19.03. The use of Docker largely does away with dependency and setup headaches, making it significantly easier to reproduce the reported results.

## Configuration
The Docker setup uses Unix groups to control permissions. You can reuse an existing group that you are a member of, or create a new group `groupadd -g GID GNAME` and add your user to it `usermod -a -G GNAME MYUSERNAME`. 

Create a file `relnet.env` at the root of the project (see `relnet_example.env`) and adjust the paths within: this is where some data generated by the container will be stored. Also specify the group ID and name created / selected above.

Add the following lines to your `.bashrc`, replacing `/home/john/git/relnet` with the path where the repository is cloned. 

```bash
export RN_SOURCE_DIR='/home/john/git/relnet'
set -a
. $RN_SOURCE_DIR/relnet.env
set +a

export PATH=$PATH:$RN_SOURCE_DIR/scripts
```

Make the scripts executable (e.g. `chmod u+x scripts/*`) the first time after cloning the repository, and run `apply_permissions.sh` in order to create and permission the necessary directories.

## Managing the containers
Some scripts are provided for convenience. To build the containers (note, this will take a significant amount of time e.g. 2 hours, as some packages are built from source):
```bash
update_container.sh
```
To start them:
```bash
manage_container.sh up
```
To stop them:
```bash
manage_container.sh stop
```
To purge the queue and restart the containers (useful for killing tasks that were launched):
```bash
purge_and_restart.sh
```

## Adjusting the number of workers and threads
To take maximum advantage of your machine's capacity, you may want to tweak the number of threads for the workers. This configuration is provided in `projectconfig.py`.
Additionally, you may want to enforce certain memory limits for your workers to avoid OOM errors. This can be tweaked in `docker-compose.yml`.

It is also relatively straightforward to add more workers from different machines you control. For this, you will need to mount the volumes on networked-attached storage (i.e., make sure paths provided in `relnet.env` are network-accessible) and adjust the location of backend and queue in `projectconfig.py` to a network location instead of localhost. On the other machines, only start the worker container (see e.g. `manage_container.sh`).  

## Setting up graph data

### Real-world data
- Copy the `rw_network_data.zip` file provided to `$RN_EXPERIMENT_DATA_DIR/real_world_graphs/raw_data`. 
- Then, unzip it `unzip rw_network_data.zip` 
- Re-grant group permissions so they can be read/modified by container users: `chgrp -R $RN_GNAME $RN_EXPERIMENT_DATA_DIR/real_world_graphs; chmod -R g+rwx $RN_EXPERIMENT_DATA_DIR/real_world_graphs/`
- Delete zip file `rm rw_network_data.zip`
- Run the following commands to wrangle the data into the expected formats:

```
docker exec -it relnet-worker-cpu /bin/bash -c "python relnet/data_wrangling/process_networks.py --include_geom_coords --dataset metro --task clean"
docker exec -it relnet-worker-cpu /bin/bash -c "python relnet/data_wrangling/process_networks.py --include_geom_coords --dataset metro --task process"

docker exec -it relnet-worker-cpu /bin/bash -c "python relnet/data_wrangling/process_networks.py --include_geom_coords --dataset internet_topology --task clean"
docker exec -it relnet-worker-cpu /bin/bash -c "python relnet/data_wrangling/process_networks.py --include_geom_coords --dataset internet_topology --task process"
```

### Synthetic data

Synthetic data will be automatically generated when the experiments are ran and stored to `$RN_EXPERIMENT_DIR/stored_graphs`.

## Accessing the services
There are several services running on the `manager` node.
- Jupyter notebook server: `http://localhost:8888`
- Flower for queue statistics: `http://localhost:5555`
- Tensorboard (currently disabled due to its large memory footprint): `http://localhost:6006`
- RabbitMQ management: `http://localhost:15672`

The first time Jupyter is accessed it will prompt for a token to enable password configuration, it can be grabbed by running `docker exec -it relnet-manager /bin/bash -c "jupyter notebook list"`.

## Accessing experiment data and results database
Experiment data and results are stored in part as files (under your configured `$RN_EXPERIMENT_DATA_DIR`) as well as in a MongoDB database.
To access the MongoDB database with a GUI, you can use a MongoDB client such as [Robo3T](https://robomongo.org/download) and point it to `http://localhost:27017`.

Some functionality is provided in `relnet/evaluation/storage.py` to insert and retrieve data, you can use it in e.g. analysis notebooks.

## Running experiments
Experiments are launched from the manager container and processed (in a parallel way) by the workers.
The file `relnet/evaluation/experiment_conditions.py` contains the configuration for the experiments reported in the paper, but you may modify e.g. agents, objective functions, hyperparameters etc. to suit your needs.

Then, you can launch all the experiments as follows:

### Part 1: Experiments on synthetic graphs (all approaches except SG-UCT)

```bash
run_synth.sh
```

### Part 2: Ablations for SG-UCT components

```bash
run_ablations.sh
```

### Part 3: SG-UCT on synthetic graphs  
```bash
run_synth_sg_uct.sh
```

### Part 4: Real-world graph experiment
```bash
run_rw.sh
```

### Part 5: Measuring wall clock timings
```bash
run_timings_rw.sh
run_timings_synth.sh 25
# ...
run_timings_synth.sh 200
```


### Part 6: Additional action reduction experiment
```bash
run_ar_experiment.sh
```

## Monitoring experiments

- You can navigate to `http://localhost:5555` for the Flower interface which shows the progress of processing tasks in the queue. You may also check logs for both manager and worker at `$RN_EXPERIMENT_DATA_DIR/logs`.

## Reproducing the results

Jupyter notebooks are used to perform the data analysis and produce tables and figures. Navigate to `http://localhost:8888`, then notebooks folder.

All tables and result figures can be obtained by opening the notebooks below, selecting the `py3-relnet` kernel and running all cells. Resulting .pdf figures and .tex tables can be found at `$RN_EXPERIMENT_DIR/aggregate`, except for Figure 4, which will be under `$RN_EXPERIMENT_DIR/ar_test`.

The relationship between notebooks and figures / tables is as follows:
- `Evaluation.ipynb`: Tables 2, 3, 4; Figure 4
- `Real_World_Graphs_Summary.ipynb`: Table 1
- `Timings_Experiments.ipynb`: Table 5, Figure 5
- `AR_Experiment.ipynb`: Figure 1 in supplementary material

You may also use the additional `Hyperparam_Optimisation.ipynb` notebook to visualize the results of hyperparameter optimization at a granular level. 
 
### Problems with jupyter kernel
In case the `py3-relnet` kernel is not found, try reinstalling the kernel by running `docker exec -it -u 0 relnet-manager /bin/bash -c "source activate relnet-cenv; python -m ipykernel install --user --name relnet --display-name py3-relnet"`